How To Update Languages from OpenFirewall Language Database

$Id: How-to-update-languages 3206 2009-07-10 11:20:09Z owes $


Temporary development how-to
- add new phrases to langs/(install|openfirewall).new.en.pl
- execute this to generate the new .po files:
  ./make.sh language
- check the svn diff
- execute this to generate the new .mo files for target OpenFirewall:
  ./make.sh build
- check that you are happy with your new phrases
- svn commit langs/(install|openfirewall).new.en.pl and .po files



*** Following does not fully apply to OpenFirewall v2 ***


Prerequisites to update from web database

- Have a working copy of svn
- Have shell access to SourceForge 
- Have developer rights for OpenFirewall Language Database (configured in langs/add/.htaccess)


Adding a username/password pair to provide editing rights to Database
- Login to a shell on SourceForge
- execute:
  htpasswd /home/groups/i/ip/openfirewall/htdocs/langs/.htpasswd username

  where 'username' is whatever you need it to be. You can only add new passwords,
  there is no way of confirming existing passwords.  
 

Adding new phrases to the Database

- Go to the 'Developer's Pages', linked at the foot of the Main Index page on 
  http://www.openfirewall.org/langs/
- Locate the 'Add a Variable' section, and input the variable name, and select 'SETUP'
  or 'WEB' from the drop down menu. 
- Web variables are all lowercase with a space between words, Installer variable strings
  are all uppercase, start with TR_ and words are separated by underscores.


Editing a Variable Name

- If you make an input mistake, contact the Database Developer, Marco van Beek, and ask 
  him to change it, or delete it (his email address is on Credits page).


Removing phrases from the Database

- In the English Index, edit the variable and change the data to 'TO BE REMOVED' (without
  quotes) and save it.
- Contact the Database Developer, Marco van Beek, and ask for all phrases marked 'TO BE 
  REMOVED' to be deleted from the database.


Add a Language

- Go to the 'Developer's Pages', linked at the foot of the Main Index page on 
  http://www.openfirewall.org/langs/
- Pick a language from the list and click 'Proceed'. The list should only show you languages
  that aren't already in the database.


Edit a Language

- Pick a language from the list (Only currently active ones will be shown) and you will
  be able to edit the details.
- The 'Copyright Notice' Section is the place to add Translator's names and the latest date 
  to the files.
- Save any changes by pressing the 'Update' button.

Tip: Do NOT add the CVS Id Tag anywhere within the file or the copyright notice, otherwise
     you will get lots of false change warnings, when the Id Tag can be the only change. 


Tools

- There are some scripts in the openfirewall/tools/ directory to simplify some tasks.

- fetchlangs.pl

  From the openfirewall directory run this command:
  openfirewall$ ./tools/fetchlangs.pl

  This will generate and download ALL the language files from the current data in the 
  Language Database.

  fetchlangs.pl has been improved to load only a language install set if that install
  directory exist. This happen when a lang is not yet include in installer (JA, ZH, ZT,
  and others). You would get an error message 'Failed to rename downloaded file'
  if that directory was not available.


- check_strings.pl

  From the openfirewall directory run this command:
  openfirewall$ ./tools/check_strings.pl

  This script checks for unused translation strings, or untranslated strings, within the 
  cgis. Use with care, as it will not find strings concatenated to form variables.
  Double-check before deciding a string is redundant.


Summary

- Regularly check for changes in the Database by first updating your working copy of CVS:
  cvs update -P -d
- Run fetchlangs.pl script
- Check for changes by diffing against CVS Repository:
  cvs -Q diff
- If you see any errors which you can fix, go into the Language Database and repair them,
  run fetchlangs.pl script again.
  TIP: Remove leading or trailing whitespace from any strings used as button
       text. Also, buttons won't function correctly if they contact HTML codes 
       as part of the string.
- When ready, commit the new changes to CVS with an explanatory message:
- cvs ci -m "Updates from Language Database."
- Monitor changes to en.pl and lang_en.c in CVS, as Developers make changes to 
  these files. Allow a little time for any changes to settle down, then add the 
  phrases to the Database (or edit them). Fix any spelling, grammer or typos
  when you add the data.
  If the text of an existing phrase is changed, you have to go through ALL the 
  other translations and delete the data, so the untranslated phrase floats to 
  the top of the Index again, otherwise Translators will be unaware of a change. 
- If additions or deletions are made to Installer scripts (lang_en.c), it is 
  important to keep the translations in sync with English. The sort order and 
  number of text strings in v1.4 Installer IS SIGNIFICANT, and the translations 
  will break if the phrases are offset, or out order. (A different approach has
  been adopted in v1.5 which will avoid this particular problem). 


Sample Advice to email to New Translators

(Urdu is used as the example. Change ur/UR to the appropriate language code).

Thanks for your offer to help translate OpenFirewall. Here are some notes on adding 
information to the online Language Database at http://www.openfirewall.org/langs
There is a link to Urdu at the bottom of the page: 
http://www.openfirewall.org/langs/edit/index.php?Language=UR

You will need a username/password to add or edit phrases, which I will send you 
separately.

When you are ready to work on a translation, click on a phrase to edit it, and 
input your translation in the field provided. Remember to translate the English 
Text, and not the Variable Name.

Click 'Update' to save and then go back to the Index page, and continue with 
another phrase. Completed work sinks to the bottom of the page.

Right at the bottom of the page are two Links, which create the language files 
used on OpenFirewall. 'ur.pl' is the one used in the web interface. Characters are 
stored in UTF-8 format.

Don't be put off by the large number of phrases. Just do them in small batches, 
or get a team together to spread the load. They don't have to be done in any 
special order. I have a list of some of the most common phrases, used in the 
menu sub-system, if you are interested - 
(http://www.eoberlander.freeserve.co.uk/linux/openfirewall/header.txt). Leave the 
phrases that start "TR_" till last, as they are used in the Installer, and our 
current Installer can't handle non-ISO 8859 character sets. This may change 
with version v1.5, currently under development.

If you find a phrase containing the text 'TO BE REMOVED', ignore it, as it is 
redundant, and will be removed from the Database eventually.

If you want to test your newly created language file, go to the bottom of the 
page.  Click on the 'Create UR.pl' file link, download the file and scp it onto 
an OpenFirewall box as /var/openfirewall/langs/ur.pl

You'll also have to edit your /var/openfirewall/langs/list file to add an entry for 
your language.

Finally to see any recent changes, you need to regenerate the language cache 
files on OpenFirewall. Execute this command as root:
perl -e "require '/var/openfirewall/lang.pl'; &Lang::BuildCacheLang"

BTW, once your work is added to CVS, which can happen when work has advanced 
past 100 phrases, you get your name included on the OpenFirewall credits.cgi page. 
Please let me know if your happy with that, and if you want your email address 
shown on the page as well (some people prefer not to expose their email address 
to avoid spam). 

Thanks again.
